Docker: Volumes — Data Persistence

Overview

Docker volumes are the recommended mechanism for persisting data generated by and used within containers. Unlike bind mounts, which depend on the host's directory structure, volumes are fully managed by Docker and operate independently from the host system.

When to Use Volumes

Volumes are the better choice when you need: easier backup and migration than bind mounts; cross-platform compatibility (volumes work on both Linux and Windows containers); safer sharing across multiple containers; content pre-population (a new volume can be pre-populated by a container); and high-performance I/O for applications that need direct filesystem writes.

Avoid volumes when you need direct file access from the host machine — use bind mounts instead for host-container file sharing.

Volume Lifecycle

Data within volumes persists beyond individual container lifespans. When a container is removed, its writable layer disappears, but volume data remains intact. Multiple containers can mount the same volume simultaneously. Unused volumes require manual removal via docker volume prune.

Core Commands

Create a volume: docker volume create my-vol
List volumes: docker volume ls
Inspect volume details: docker volume inspect my-vol
Remove a volume: docker volume rm my-vol

Mounting Volumes

Using --mount (recommended, more flexible):

docker run --mount type=volume,src=myvolume,dst=/data nginx:latest

Using -v (shorthand):

docker run -v myvolume:/data nginx:latest

Docker Compose Integration

services:
  frontend:
    image: node:lts
    volumes:
      - myapp:/home/node/app
volumes:
  myapp:

For externally-managed volumes:

volumes:
  myapp:
    external: true

Read-Only Volumes

Restrict container write access by adding readonly (or :ro with the -v shorthand):

docker run -d --mount source=nginx-vol,destination=/usr/share/nginx/html,readonly nginx:latest
docker run -d -v nginx-vol:/usr/share/nginx/html:ro nginx:latest

Backup and Restore

Back up a volume:

docker run --rm --volumes-from dbstore -v $(pwd):/backup ubuntu tar cvf /backup/backup.tar /dbdata

Restore from backup:

docker run --rm --volumes-from dbstore2 -v $(pwd):/backup ubuntu bash -c "cd /dbdata && tar xvf /backup/backup.tar --strip 1"

Anonymous volumes (created without an explicit name) can be automatically removed when their container exits using --rm. Remove all unused volumes at once with docker volume prune.

Docker volumes provide robust, managed persistence that outperforms container writable layers while maintaining simplicity and portability across environments.

Bind Mounts vs. Volumes

A bind mount maps a specific path on the host filesystem directly into the container, meaning the exact directory structure and permissions of the host machine are exposed inside the container. This is extremely useful during local development, where you want code changes made on the host to be immediately visible inside a running container without rebuilding an image:

docker run -v $(pwd)/src:/app/src node:20

Unlike volumes, bind mounts depend entirely on the host machine having that exact directory structure, which makes them less portable across different machines and less suitable for production deployments where the underlying host may vary or may not even be under your control (as with many managed container platforms).

tmpfs Mounts

A third storage option, tmpfs mounts, stores data only in the host's memory, never writing it to the host filesystem at all. Data in a tmpfs mount disappears the moment the container stops, which makes tmpfs suitable for temporary sensitive data (like a decrypted secret used only during a single process's runtime) that should never be persisted to disk at all:

docker run --tmpfs /app/tmp:rw,size=64m nginx

Named Volume Drivers

Beyond the default local driver, Docker supports pluggable volume drivers that back a volume with alternative storage, such as a network filesystem or a cloud block storage service. This lets multi-host container deployments share the same volume across machines, something the default local driver cannot do since it only stores data on the single host where the volume was created:

docker volume create --driver vieux/sshfs -o sshcmd=user@remote:/path my-remote-vol

Volumes and Data Ownership

Because a volume is fully managed by the Docker daemon rather than exposed as a literal host directory, its exact on-disk location is an implementation detail you generally shouldn't rely on. The docker volume inspect command reveals the actual mountpoint on the host for troubleshooting purposes, but application code and Dockerfiles should always reference volumes by name rather than by the underlying host path, keeping the setup portable across different Docker installations and operating systems.

Pruning and Cleanup

Because unused volumes silently persist on disk until explicitly removed, it's easy to accumulate significant unused storage over time, especially in development environments where containers are frequently recreated. The prune command removes every volume not currently referenced by at least one container:

docker volume prune

Adding the -a flag removes all unused volumes, not just anonymous ones, while filters can narrow the scope of what gets pruned, for example by label:

docker volume prune --filter "label!=keep"


Docker: Networking

Source: https://docs.docker.com/engine/network/

Core Concepts

Container networking refers to the ability for containers to connect to and communicate with each other, and with non-Docker network services. By default, containers operate with networking enabled and can establish outgoing connections. Each container perceives only a network interface with an IP address, gateway, routing table, and DNS services, without any awareness of the underlying network type or the host machine's own networking setup.

The Default Bridge Network

When Docker Engine starts on Linux, it creates a built-in "default bridge" network, and any container launched without an explicit --network flag automatically connects to it. These containers get external network access through masquerading, requiring no additional configuration if the host itself has Internet connectivity:

$ docker run --rm -ti busybox ping -c1 docker.com
PING docker.com (23.185.0.4): 56 data bytes
64 bytes from 23.185.0.4: seq=0 ttl=62 time=6.564 ms

User-Defined Networks

Containers on the default bridge can reach each other by IP address, but not by hostname. Custom networks remove that limitation, allowing containers to communicate with each other using container names as if they were hostnames:

$ docker network create -d bridge my-net
$ docker run --network=my-net -it busybox

Network Drivers

Docker provides several built-in drivers on Linux:

bridge — the default driver, isolating container networks from each other
host — removes network isolation between the container and the Docker host entirely
none — completely isolates a container from the host and other containers
overlay — enables Swarm communication across multiple Docker daemons/hosts
ipvlan — connects containers to external VLANs directly
macvlan — containers appear as distinct devices on the host's own network

Multiple Network Connections

A container can attach to multiple networks at once, similar to plugging more than one Ethernet cable into a physical host. This is common when a frontend container needs to connect both to an external-facing bridge network and to an internal network used only for backend communication:

$ docker run --network name=gwnet,gw-priority=1 --network anet1 --name myctr myimage
$ docker network connect anet2 myctr

The gw-priority parameter controls which attached network serves as the default gateway. The default gw-priority is 0, and whichever attached network has the highest priority becomes the container's default gateway for outbound traffic.

IP Addressing and Subnets

IPv4 allocation is enabled by default when creating a network; IPv6 must be explicitly enabled:

$ docker network create --ipv6 --ipv4=false v6net

Subnets can be explicitly specified or automatically allocated from Docker's default pools, which are configured in /etc/docker/daemon.json and span ranges from 172.17.0.0/16 through 192.168.0.0/16 by default. To specify a subnet explicitly:

$ docker network create --ipv6 --subnet 192.0.2.0/24 --subnet 2001:db8::/64 mynet

Containers draw their IP addresses from whichever network(s) they're connected to. Hostnames default to the container ID but can be overridden with --hostname, and --ip / --ip6 assign specific addresses on a particular network.

Published Ports

Container ports on bridge networks are reachable from the host and from other containers on the same bridge network by default, but remain unreachable from outside the host entirely unless explicitly published. The --publish (or -p) flag makes a port available outside the host, and to containers in other bridge networks that wouldn't otherwise see it.

DNS Configuration

Containers inherit host DNS settings from /etc/resolv.conf by default. However, containers attached to custom (user-defined) networks instead use Docker's embedded DNS server, reachable at 127.0.0.11, which forwards any external queries on to the host's configured DNS servers. Related docker run flags include --dns (specify DNS server IPs), --dns-search (search domains for non-fully-qualified hostnames), --dns-opt (DNS resolver options), and --hostname (assign the container's own hostname).

Container Networking Mode

A container can share another container's entire networking stack using --network container:<name|id>. This restricts several other flags from being used at the same time, including --add-host, --hostname, --dns, --dns-search, --dns-option, --mac-address, --publish, --publish-all, and --expose, since the container no longer has its own independent network namespace to configure. A common example is a debugging or CLI tool sharing a running service's network namespace so it can reach that service over localhost:

$ docker run -d --name redis redis --bind 127.0.0.1
$ docker run --rm -it --network container:redis redis redis-cli -h 127.0.0.1

Networking and Docker Compose

Docker Compose creates a dedicated network for each project by default, and every service defined in a compose file automatically joins it, letting services reach each other by their service name as a hostname without any manual network configuration — this is one of the main conveniences Compose provides over manually wiring up docker network create and docker run --network calls for a multi-container application.